At one time the Black Wolf of America was considered by naturalists to
be only a variety of the common Wolf, but it is now believed to be a
distinct species, not only by reason of the color of its fur but from
differences of stature, the position of the eye, the peculiar bushiness
of the hair and other evidence entitling it to rank as a separate
species. This variety is referred to as an inhabitant of Florida,
and is described as partaking of the general lupine character, being
fierce, dangerous, and at the same time cowardly and pusillanimous,
when they find themselves fairly enclosed. If imprisoned in even a
large space, they crouch timidly in the corners, and do not venture to
attack man when he enters the cage. Audubon mentions a curious instance
of this strange timidity in a ferocious nature, of which he was an
eye-witness: "A farmer had suffered greatly from Wolves, and determined
to take revenge by means of pitfalls, of which he had dug several
within easy reach of his residence. They were eight feet in depth and
wider at the bottom than at the top. Into one of these traps three fine
Wolves had fallen, two of them black, and the other a brindled animal.
To the very great astonishment of Mr. Audubon, the farmer got into the
pit, pulled out the hind legs of the Wolves, as they lay trembling at
the bottom, and with his knife severed the chief tendon of the hind
limbs, so as to prevent their escape. The skins of the captured animals
were sufficiently valuable to reimburse the farmer for his labor and
his previous losses."

The Esquimaux use traps made of large blocks of ice, constructed in the
same manner as our ordinary mouse-trap with a drop-door. The trap is
made so narrow that the Wolf cannot turn himself, and when he is closed
in by the treacherous door, he is put to death by spears.

Wood says that when Wolves and Dogs are domesticated in the same
residence a mutual attachment will often spring up between them,
although they naturally bear the bitterest hatred to each other. A
mixed offspring is sometimes the result of this curious friendship,
and it is said that these half-breed animals are more powerful and
courageous than the ordinary Dog. Mr. Palliser possessed a fine animal
of this kind, the father of which was a White Wolf and the mother an
ordinary Indian Dog. It is a well-known fact that the Esquimaux are
constantly in the habit of crossing their sledge Dogs with Wolves in
order to impart strength and stamina to the breed. Indeed they are so
closely related to Wolves that there can be no question that they are
descended from them.

The Wolf produces from three to nine young in a litter. In January
the mother Wolf begins to prepare her habitation, a task in which she
is protected or assisted by her mate, who has won her in a fair fight
from his many rivals. He attaches himself solely to one mate, and never
leaves her till the young Wolves are able to shift for themselves. The
den in which the young cubs are born is warmly lined with fur which she
pulls from her own body. The cubs are born in March and remain under
her protection seven or eight months. They begin to eat animal food in
four weeks after birth.

    The Wolf's whelp will at last a Wolf become
    Though from his birth he find with man a home.

